U.S. stocks slid Friday, putting major indexes on track for their longest weekly losing streak since January.
U.S. stocks rose Monday, putting major indexes on track for their longest weekly losing streak since January.
Michael has a really nice house.
This flight is very long.
I am going to las vegas.

U.S. crude's West Texas Intermediate futures  CLc1  rose
$1.57, or 3.5 percent, to settle at $46.23.
    The rally in crude crossed over to refined oil products,
with gasoline settling up 6 percent and ultra-low-sulfur diesel,
or heating oil, 4 percent. The refining margin, or "crack," for
gasoline  1RBc1-CLc1  had its biggest daily gain in three
months, rising more than 14 percent to above $20 a
barrel.

A potential home buyer views a model home at the Shapell Industries Inc. Gale Ranch community in San Ramon, California.

Purchases (NHSLTOT) of new homes in the U.S. fell in February to the lowest level in five months, a sign the industry may take time to pick up after inclement weather damped demand earlier in the year.

Sales declined 3.3 percent to a 440,000 annualized pace, following a 455,000 rate in the prior month that was the strongest in a year, figures from the Commerce Department showed today in Washington. The median forecast of 77 economists surveyed by Bloomberg called for 445,000.

Unusually frigid temperatures added to restraints including rising mortgage rates, higher property values, and a lack of supply that kept prospective buyers away from the market for new and existing properties. Bigger gains in employment and consumer sentiment would help spur the recovery in homebuilding, sustaining its contribution to economic growth and boosting earnings at companies such as Lennar Corp. and KB Home.

“There’s a big upside to new-home sales,” said Robert Dye, chief economist at Comerica Inc. in Dallas, who correctly projected the drop in sales last month. “We have a huge amount of pent-up demand and very tight inventories. Mortgage rates, although they’ve risen, are still very low. We expect to see continuing improvement in the housing market.”

Economists’ estimates ranged from 406,000 to 506,000. The reading for the prior month was revised down from a previously reported 468,000.

Slower Appreciation

Another report today showed prices of home resales climbed at a slower pace in the year through January than a month earlier, indicating momentum in property-value appreciation is cooling.

The S&P/Case-Shiller index of 20 cities increased 13.2 percent from January 2013, the smallest gain since August, after rising 13.4 percent in the 12 months through December. The median projection of 30 economists surveyed by Bloomberg called for a 13.3 percent advance. Compared with the prior month, prices rose 0.8 percent.

Also today, another report showed consumer confidence unexpectedly jumped in March to the highest level in six years. The Conference Board’s sentiment index rose to 82.3 in March, the highest since January 2008, from 78.3 a month earlier, the New York-based private research group said.

The median forecast in a Bloomberg survey of 76 economists called for a reading of 78.5 this month. Estimates ranged from 75 to 80.

Shares Climb

Stocks held earlier gains after the reports. The Standard & Poor’s 500 Index increased 0.6 percent to 1,868.76 at 10:23 a.m. in New York.

The median sales price of a new house decreased 1.2 percent from February 2013, to reach $261,800, according to today’s Commerce Department report. It was the biggest year-to-year decline since June 2012. The median can be affected by the mix of sales by region as prices are generally higher in the Northeast and West where demand declined.

Purchases dropped in three of the four regions, led by a 32.4 percent slump in the Northeast. The West decreased 15.9 percent and the South fell 1.5 percent. Demand in the Midwest jumped 36.7 percent to the highest level since May 2013, after dropping almost 20 percent the prior month.

More Supply

The supply of homes at the current sales rate climbed to 5.2 months from 5 months in the prior month. There were 189,000 new houses on the market at the end of February, the most since December 2010.

New-home sales, which accounted for about 8 percent of the residential market in 2013, are tabulated when contracts are signed, making them a timelier barometer than purchases of previously owned dwellings. Sales of existing homes are tabulated when a deal closes, typically a month or two later.

The weather depressed parts of the housing market, recent reports showed. Sales of previously owned properties declined in February to the lowest level since July 2012, according to data from the National Association of Realtors. The National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo index of builder confidence rose less than forecast in March.

Warmer temperatures may revive construction and help bring more buyers out in coming months.

The recent weakness is “a temporary pause,” and the homebuilding industry is still in the early stages of recovery, Ara Hovnanian, chief executive officer of Hovnanian Enterprises Inc., New Jersey’s largest homebuilder, said in a statement on March 5.

Growing Profits

Lennar, the biggest U.S. homebuilder by market value, last week reported a fiscal first-quarter profit that beat analysts’ estimates as it sold more homes at higher prices.

“The housing-market recovery continues as we begin to enter the more vibrant seasonal months of the year,” Chief Executive Officer Stuart Miller said on a March 20 conference call with analysts. “The fundamental drivers of improvement in the housing market remain a steadily improving economy with a slowly improving employment picture unlocking pent-up demand, while supplies remain constrained to meet that demand.”

Los Angeles-based KB Home also reported fiscal first-quarter earnings that beat estimates as it raised prices and opened communities in high-cost, land-constrained markets, such as parts of California.

Rising borrowing costs have limited affordability. The average 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage rate was 4.32 percent in the week ended March 20, up from 3.54 percent a year earlier, according to Freddie Mac in McLean, Virginia.

Federal Reserve policy makers last week gave themselves room to keep borrowing costs low at least until next year by dropping a link between the benchmark interest rate and a specific level of unemployment. The central bank also reduced the monthly pace of bond purchases by $10 billion, to $55 billion.

Household formation would ultimately generate new construction, Fed Chair Janet Yellen said during a news conference after the policy meeting.

U.S. mortgage lending is contracting to levels not seen since 1997 -- the year Tiger Woods won his first of four Masters championships -- as rising interest rates and home prices drive away borrowers.

Wells Fargo (WFC) & Co. and JPMorgan Chase & Co., the two largest U.S. mortgage lenders, reported a first-quarter plunge in loan volumes that’s part of an industry-wide drop off. Lenders made $226 billion of mortgages in the period, the smallest quarterly amount since 1997 and less than one-third of the 2006 average, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association in Washington.

Lending has been tumbling since mid-2013 when mortgage rates jumped about a percentage point after the Federal Reserve said it might taper stimulus spending. A surge in all-cash purchases to more than 40 percent has kept housing prices rising, squeezing more Americans out of the market. That will help push lending down further this year, according to the association.

“Banks large and small are going to have to adapt to a new reality because mortgage origination volumes going forward aren’t going to support the big businesses they’ve had in place for the last few years,” said Stephen Stanley, chief economist at Pierpont Securities LLC in Stamford, Connecticut. “They’re going to have smaller, leaner operations, and we’re seeing them make that shift.”

At Wells Fargo, home-loan originations exceeded $100 billion for seven straight quarters, ending in June 2013. The figure plunged to $36 billion in the three months through March, the San Francisco-based bank said April 11.

Rising Rates

Wells Fargo’s results show the shift in the housing market away from refinancings as interest rates climb. Just 34 percent of its originations went to customers refinancing loans, compared with 69 percent in the same period of 2013.

Timothy Sloan, Wells Fargo’s chief financial officer, said a combination of forces, including tougher standards following the housing crash, account for the falloff in lending.

“It’s too early to call it a secular shift,” Sloan said in an interview. “This recovery has just been more complicated because of the impact of rates being low, and now they are backing up a little bit. We’ve had a lot of regulatory changes, we’ve had a change in underwriting standards that the market is getting used to.”

The average interest rate for a 30-year fixed mortgage was 4.34 percent last week, up from 3.54 percent a year ago, according to a statement from Freddie Mac.

Cutting Staff

Lenders also are tightening credit standards, requiring higher FICO scores. More than 40 percent of borrowers in 2013 had scores above 760, compared with about 25 percent in 2001, according to a Feb. 20 report by Goldman Sachs Group Inc. analysts Hui Shan and Eli Hackel.

JPMorgan originated $17 billion of home loans in the first quarter of 2014, lower than at any time during the housing crash. The New York-based bank made $52.7 billion of mortgages a year earlier. Marianne Lake, JPMorgan’s CFO, cited severe winter weather as among the reasons for the first-quarter drop.

“We view JPM and WFC’s mortgage banking results as lower than expected,” Keefe, Bruyette & Woods analysts led by Frederick Cannon said Friday in a research note, referring to the bank’s stock symbols. “Mortgage volumes and applications were down materially.”

The lenders are cutting staff in the slump. JPMorgan said it reduced the number of jobs at its mortgage unit by 30 percent, or 14,000 positions, since the start of last year. That includes 3,000 reductions in the first quarter. Wells Fargo said it got rid of 1,100 jobs in its residential mortgage business in the first period.

Cash Deals

JPMorgan projected on April 11 that it will lose money on mortgage production this year because of the drop in demand.

All-cash purchases, dominated by investors, are surging as lending drops. Deals in cash accounted for more than 43 percent of U.S. residential sales in February, up from 20 percent a year earlier, with the most in Florida, New York and Nevada, according to data firm RealtyTrac.

Wells Fargo said last week that it’s seeing more cash buyers in the housing market.

“Some of those cash buyers were investors, both individuals and private equity firms and the like, and that had an impact on home prices,” Wells Fargo’s Sloan said. “If you look at the year-over-year increase in home prices being in the low teens, our folks think probably a third of that increase was due to the impact of investors as buyers.”

Institutional Landlords

Private-equity firms, hedge funds, real estate investment trusts and other institutional landlords have spent more than $20 billion to buy as many as 200,000 rental homes in the last two years. They snapped up properties after prices fell as much as 35 percent from the 2006 peak and rental demand rose from the almost 5 million owners who went through foreclosure since 2008.

Investors focused on the markets hardest hit by the real estate crash, including Phoenix, Las Vegas and Atlanta, and have helped push prices higher in those areas.

“This is an investor-heavy market recovery,” said Daren Blomquist, vice president of RealtyTrac in Irvine, California. “We’ve seen a relatively high percentage of institutional investors as one segment, and regular mom-and-pop investors as another, jumping back in as they see the market hit bottom and start to rise.”

Home prices have surged 23 percent since a post-bubble low in March 2012, according to the S&P/Case-Shiller index. The gains have slowed as climbing values in the past two years started to reduce affordability.

Small Market

Prices for single-family homes rose in fewer areas in the fourth quarter, with 73 percent of U.S. cities experiencing gains compared with 88 percent in the previous three months, according to the National Association of Realtors.

Higher values will make it harder for banks to find qualified borrowers this year.

“We’re going to have a small market,” JPMorgan’s Lake said on an April 11 conference call. “ We’d be hopeful that the market would be above $1 trillion for the whole year.”

Consumer satisfaction with banks has increased to pre-recession levels, according to a consumer survey conducted by the Index.

According to the survey, which polled some 70,000 consumers in the U.S., customer satisfaction with banks grew by 1.3 percent over the past year to reach a score of 78, out of 100. Overall, customer satisfaction with financial services -- which includes banks, credit unions, health insurance, property and casualty insurance, and life insurance -- rose .3 percent in 2013.

According to the survey, smaller banks (which rose 5 percentage points to a score of 83) and credit unions (up 4 percent to 85) far outdistanced their larger competitors. Among the largest four banks, JPMorgan Chase maintained the highest score with a 3 percent gain to 76, while Citigroup jumped 6 percent to 74, and Wells Fargo edged up 1 percent to 72. Bank of America registered its largest improvement in a decade, to reach a score of 69, but remained in last place, and is the only bank that has yet to restore its pre-recession level of customer satisfaction, said the ACSI.

The strong jobs market is
likely to send sales higher at retailers and restaurants but
leave investors unhappy, worrying fund managers who have crowded
into consumer stocks.
    Wage increases, driven by higher minimum wages and greater
competition for employees, are squeezing margins, forcing
companies to eat higher labor costs while also investing in
technology in hopes of saving money over time, investors and
analysts said.
    Consumer company shares fell more than 1 percent Wednesday
after heavyweights Walt Disney Co  DIS.N  and Macy's Inc  M.N
missed analyst estimates and retailer Ross Stores  ROST.O  was
downgraded.

Canada's main stock index rose to a one-week high on Wednesday, led by energy and financial stocks as oil turned higher after the release of weekly inventory data.

Revenues were considerably higher in fiscal Q2 2016 compared to the same quarter
last year. This was a result of the acquisitions of two new product portfolios in
February and  March 2016, the additions of Salagen and Estraderm in mid-2015,
along with a shift to recording most of our Sintrom sales on a gross basis.  The
second quarter fiscal 2016 results include earnings from the newly acquired
products from the date of acquisition through  March 31, 2016.

    * Gross oil production of 69,100 bbl (working interest
44,900 bbl) for three months ended march 31, 2016.
    * 800 bbl/d (working interest 500 bbl/d) average oil
production for three months ended march 31, 2016.
    * 2016 cash capital expenditure forecast of $62 million
announced on March 16, 2016 remains unchanged.
    * Qtrly loss per share $0.13.
    * Q1 earnings per share view $-0.03 -- Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
    * Oryx Petroleum first quarter 2016 financial andoperational results.

German sportswear firm Adidas
AG  ADSGn.DE  announced on Wednesday it is prematurely ending
its partnership deal with English soccer side Chelsea, opening
the door to an unnamed rival, prompting it to raise full-year
profit forecast.
    Adidas said the group's net income from continuing
operations is now forecast to increase by around 25 percent in
2016 to a level of around 900 million euros ($1.03 billion),
while its operating margin is now projected to increase to a
level of around 7.0 percent.
    As compensation for early termination of contract, Adidas
will receive a payment in 2017 that will already positively
impact group's profit in the second quarter, the company said.
    In the second quarter Adidas expects a mid-double-digit
million euros net income gain.

 top executives laid out an ambitious strategy on Wednesday to increase revenue and profits and secure its future for the next 100 years, promising to boost efficiency, return free cash to shareholders and expand the after-market services and parts business.

But the executives did not provide details sought by analysts about new plane derivatives to counter competitive threats from Airbus.

Adidas said the Chelsea move was in line with a shift in strategy last year to partner with fewer teams. It has also been moving spending away from sports federations and towards individual stars who can promote the brand on social media.

It says it wants to cut the portion of its marketing budget for sports deals to below 45 percent in 2020 from about half now as it increases spending on pushing the brand directly on social media, in stores and at grassroots sporting events.

Adidas, which has sponsored Chelsea since 2006, said it had reached a mutual agreement to end the deal on June 30, 2017 year, instead of in 2023 as originally agreed, allowing the club to enter a new agreement with an unnamed competitor.

Last month English Premier League club Southampton announced it was switching from Adidas to Under Armour, while second-placed Tottenham is reportedly in talks with Nike, which also sponsors Manchester City. Puma sponsors third-placed Arsenal.

The shirts of Leicester City, the surprise winner of this season's Premier League championship, are sponsored by the King Power firm belonging to its Thai owner.

In a statement on its website, Chelsea confirmed that it was ending its deal with Adidas, but did not give any more details beyond thanking the German firm for its support in the last decade and listing the competitions it won in that time.

As compensation for early termination of contract, Adidas will receive a payment in 2017 from Chelsea that will lift its net income in the second quarter of 2016 by a sum in the mid-double-digit million euros.

Adidas said the group's net income from continuing operations is now forecast to increase by around 25 percent in 2016, to around 900 million euros (692 million pounds), more than the 15-18 percent rise previously targeted.

Its operating margin is now projected to increase to a level of around 7 percent from a previous 6.6-7 percent.

Adidas had already lifted its forecast last month after it reported a jump in quarterly sales and profits.

Wabtec Corporation
(NYSE:WAB) today increased its regular quarterly dividend to 10 cents per
share, from 8 cents per share. The new dividend rate will be payable initially
Aug. 29, 2016 to shareholders of record Aug. 15, 2016.

 Raymond T. Betler, Wabtec’s president and chief executive officer, said:
“Based on our current financial performance and future outlook, the company
has ample financial strength to invest in growth opportunities and to return a
greater portion of our cash flow to shareholders. We intend to continue to
review our policies periodically based on Wabtec’s ongoing performance and
growth prospects.”

The quarterly cash
dividend declared today represents an 8.3% increase from the previously declared
dividend of  twelve cents  per share of common stock per quarter.

This represents an increase of approximately 6.5 percent on an annualized dividend of  66 cents  per share.

The board of directors of Lennox International Inc. (NYSE: LII) voted to increase the quarterly cash dividend 19 percent to  $0.43 per share of common stock.
The dividend is payable on  July 15, 2016, to stockholders of record as of June 30, 2016.

Lennox International Inc. is a global leader in the heating, air conditioning,
and refrigeration markets.  Lennox International Inc. stock is listed on the New
York Stock Exchange and traded under the symbol "LII".

Magnuson
Hotels, America's fastest growing hotel brand, today announced a 35.15% YTD
revenue increase. The company also reports a 22.84% increase in ADR (average
daily rate) for reservations generated from 2015 to 2016.

Driving this performance increase are continued lower US gas prices, strong job
growth and increased consumer brand recognition. Magnuson implemented a national
rebranding of its three brands in 2015, while also launching its "Follow the
Star" advertising campaign on a national basis.

Notable branded hotels that joined the Magnuson group in the last 12 months
include the Magnuson Hotel Convention Center New York City, the Magnuson
Hotel Framingham, MA and Magnuson Hotel Marshal, TX.

Since its launch 13 years ago, Magnuson Hotels has become America's
fastest growing hotel brand and a top 10 global chain, marketing 1,000 hotels
across six countries and three continents.

Magnuson Hotels' newly formed distribution partnership with Chinese operator Jin
Jiang Hotels and Europe's Louvre Hotels is the world's largest hotel alliance,
forming a consortium of over 6,000 hotels worldwide, equal to the size of a top
5 global hotel chain.

New York State's financial regulator has
asked Goldman Sachs  GS.N  and three foreign banks for shell
company information, a person familiar with the matter said on
Wednesday.

    The New York Department of Financial Services (NYDFS) also
requested shell company information from BNP Paribas SA
 BNPP.PA , Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce  CM.TO  and
Standard Chartered Plc  STAN.L , the person said.
    Goldman is the only U.S. bank contacted by NYDFS about the
request, the person said.
    A Goldman Sachs spokesperson declined to comment.
Spokespeople for the three foreign banks could not be
immediately reached for comment.
    The move by NYDFS comes weeks after the International
Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ) worked with media
outlets including The Guardian and BBC to report on 11.5 million
leaked documents from Panama law firm Mossack
Fonseca. urn:newsml:reuters.com:*:nL2N17P21C
    The documents, which have come to be known as the Panama
Papers, contained information on about 214,000 offshore
companies and showed how individuals and corporations were able
to hide assets and avoid taxes. The ICIJ made its database of
documents publicly available on Monday.

Stabilization in the dollar and oil prices will help corporate earnings improve in the second half, says Ross Gerber of Gerber Kawasaki.

French media group Vivendi
 VIV.PA  said its core operating profit fell 2.5 percent as its
music division faced higher restructuring charges.
    Earnings before interest, taxes and amortisation (EBITA) for
the three months that ended in March amounted to 213 million
euros ($243.7 million), with total revenues over the period of
2.491 billion euros.
    Vivendi's music unit, Universal Music Group, generated an
EBITA of 79 million euros in the first quarter, down 4 percent
from a year earlier, in spite of an increase of 0.6 percent of
its revenues to 1.12 billion euros.
    Separately, the group said that the son of Chairman Vincent
Bollore, Yannick Bollore, will be co-opted as a member of the
group's supervisory board in replacement of Philippe Donnet.
    The nomination of Yannick Bollore, who is chief executive
officer of advertising group Havas  HAVA.PA , will be submitted
to Vivendi's next shareholders' meeting for ratification.

May 11 (Reuters) - Weibo Corp Says  Q1 Value  WB.O.
    * Added services ("vas") revenue increased 17% year over year to $20.0 million.
    * Weibo corp says  monthly active users in march 2016 grew
32% year over year to 261 million, 85% of which were mobile
users.
Qtrly advertising and marketing revenue increased 25% year over year to $99.2 million.
Weibo corp says  average daily active users in march 2016grew 35% year over year to 120 million.
Q2 revenue view $135.6 million -- Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Weibo reports first quarter 2016 financial results.
Q1 non-gaap earnings per share $0.07.
Q1 earnings per share $0.03.
Q1 revenue $119.3 million versus i/b/e/s view $113.7 million.
Q1 earnings per share view $0.04 -- Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.
Sees q2 2016 revenue $138 million to $143 million.



Goldman Sachs Group Inc. (GS), the Wall Street bank with the highest return on equity last year, reported earnings that topped analysts’ estimates as investment-banking revenue jumped to the highest level since the financial crisis.

First-quarter net income fell 10 percent to $2.03 billion, or $4.02 a share, from $2.26 billion, or $4.29, a year earlier, the New York-based company said today in a statement. That beat the $3.49 average estimate of 25 analysts in a Bloomberg survey.

Chief Executive Officer Lloyd C. Blankfein, 59, is facing a prolonged slump in fixed-income trading as he seeks to boost return on equity, which has been less than 12 percent for four straight years after topping 30 percent before the financial crisis. A jump in mergers and initial public offerings in the quarter suggests investment banking may be picking up.

“The quarter was cautiously promising, in the sense that you’re seeing some good activity in underwriting, and mergers and acquisitions looks like it should be positioned for a good year, depending on what we see from CEO confidence,” Kenneth Leon, an analyst who covers the financial industry for S&P Capital IQ, said before the results were announced.

Goldman Sachs climbed 1.5 percent to $157.22 in New York trading yesterday. The shares dropped 7.6 percent in the first quarter, after climbing more than 38 percent in each of the past two years. They are still below their pre-crisis peak of $247.92 on Oct. 31, 2007.

Buybacks, Dividends

The firm has sought to entice investors through buybacks and dividends. Goldman Sachs returned $12.7 billion to shareholders in 2012 and 2013, more than the combined total of Citigroup Inc., Bank of America Corp. and Morgan Stanley.

Over the next 12 months, Goldman Sachs won’t get to give shareholders back as much capital as it originally planned. The firm had to cut its capital-return request to win approval from the Federal Reserve after its initial proposal pushed the company’s leverage ratio below the required minimum.

The bank didn’t say what the revised plan entails. Credit Suisse Group AG analysts including Christian Bolu and Ashley Serrao estimated Goldman Sachs will keep its 55-cent dividend constant and buy back $6 billion of stock through March, down from the previous 12-month period.

Morgan Stanley earlier today reported profit of $1.51 billion, beating analysts’ estimates as revenue from the brokerage unit increased from a year earlier.

JPMorgan Chase & Co., the biggest U.S. bank by assets, posted earnings last week that missed analysts’ estimates on lower revenue from fixed-income trading and mortgages. Bank of America yesterday swung to a surprise loss as the company booked $6 billion of costs tied to mortgage disputes.

Trading Results

Goldman Sachs posted its lowest trading profit since the financial crisis last year, less than a quarter of the $19 billion it earned in 2009. Larger banks have surpassed the firm in fixed-income trading revenue, where Goldman Sachs set a Wall Street record in 2009 as others struggled to recover from the financial crisis.

The firm has shuffled its trading ranks this year, promoting Ashok Varadhan, the 41-year-old chief of macro trading, as the third co-head of the securities division. The bank also named its heads of equity and credit trading -- Paul Russo and Michael Daffey, and Justin Gmelich, respectively -- to its management committee. It hired Kayhan Mirza from JPMorgan as global head of foreign-exchange trading, replacing Guy Saidenberg, who became co-head of the firm’s commodities business.

Investment Banking

With trading in a slump, Goldman Sachs has had to rely on its other businesses to maintain higher returns than its peers. Investing and Lending, which includes the firm’s own investments, earned more than trading for the first time last year, while investment banking posted its highest profit margin since at least 2000 and asset management topped $1 trillion in client assets for the first time ever.

Goldman Sachs held the top spot among arrangers of global equity, equity-linked and rights offerings in the first quarter, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. It ranked third in advising on announced mergers and acquisitions and fifth in underwriting U.S. bonds, the data show.

U.S. homebuilder sentiment edged up in April but remained mostly dour on lingering concerns about stiff credit conditions for buyers and tight supply of building lots and labor, the National Association of Home Builders said on Tuesday.

The NAHB/Wells Fargo Housing Market index rose to 47 in April from a downwardly revised 46 in March, the group said in a statement. Economists polled by Reuters had predicted the index would rebound to 50 in April.

Readings below 50 mean more builders view market conditions as poor than favorable. The April reading was the index's third in a row to come in below 50.

"Builder confidence has been in a holding pattern the past three months," said NAHB Chairman Kevin Kelly, a builder and developer from Wilmington, Delaware. "Looking ahead, as the spring home buying season gets into full swing and demand increases, builders are expecting sales prospects to improve in the months ahead."

"Headwinds that are holding up a more robust recovery include ongoing tight credit conditions for home buyers and the fact that builders in many markets are facing a limited availability of lots and labor," NAHB Chief Economist David Crowe said.

The index's single-family home sales component was unchanged at 51 after the March figure was revised lower by 1 point.

The gauge of single-family sales expectations for the next six months jumped to a three-month high of 57 from 53, which had been the lowest since May.

Prospective buyer traffic was unchanged at 32 after the previous figure was revised lower by a point.

Wells Fargo & Co, the biggest U.S. mortgage lender, reported a higher-than-expected 14 percent rise in first-quarter net profit, as a series of cost cuts and one-time gains helped the bank offset the lowest volume of home loans it made in five-and-a-half years.

The bank, the most profitable in the United States in 2013, has been hurt in recent quarters by declining demand for mortgage refinancing, as lending rates have risen.

Income from mortgage banking fell by 46 percent to $1.5 billion from the same quarter last year. Wells Fargo's new home loans fell by two-thirds to $36 billion in the quarter from $109 billion a year earlier, the lowest since the third quarter of 2008, when the housing market was under heavy stress.

But a series of one-time items this quarter helped offset much of the decline in the mortgage business. Wells Fargo recorded $847 million in gains on its equity investments, about 7.5 times the $113 million it earned a year earlier.

Its tax bill was also $227 million lower as it booked a $423 million benefit from resolving prior disputes with state tax authorities. Overall operating expenses fell 4 percent as it spent less on employee benefits and incentive compensation.

Another boost to net income came from the bank dipping into funds set aside to cover soured loans, as the housing market and the overall economy stabilized. The bank released $500 million from these reserves, higher than the $200 million a year ago but less than the $600 million released in the fourth quarter.

Without many of these one-time gains, Wells Fargo's results would have missed Wall Street's estimates, according to Citigroup Inc banking analyst Keith Horowitz.

JPMorgan Chase & Co, the biggest U.S. bank by assets, reported Friday profits fell 19 percent from a year earlier thanks to weaker-than-expected bond trading and mortgage banking revenue.

Wells Fargo's shares rose 1.5 percent in afternoon trading at $48.41. JPMorgan Chase shares fell 3.3 percent to $55.48. The KBW index of bank stocks was down nearly 1 percent.

Net income for Wells Fargo's common shareholders rose to $5.60 billion, or $1.05 per share, in the quarter, from $4.93 billion, or 92 cents per share, a year earlier.

Analysts on average had expected the bank to earn 97 cents per share, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S.

"Wells always finds a way to figure it out," said Jason Goldberg, a banking analyst at Barclays. "This is a company that consistently puts up better-than-peer results."

'A DIFFERENT COMPLEXION'

Chief Financial Officer Tim Sloan told Reuters that being able to benefit from occasionally outsized equity gains and tax benefits spoke to the strength of being a diversified institution with many distinct business lines.

"Unless your revenue sources were exactly like the prior quarter where every business increased by same percentage, someone will say that's not sustainable," he said. "Every quarter has a different complexion."

There were some indications in Wells Fargo's results that mortgage banking might be rising out of the doldrums. The bank had $27 billion of mortgage applications in the pipeline at the end of the quarter, up slightly from $25 billion at the end of the fourth quarter. Chief Executive John Stumpf told analysts on a conference call that "the housing recovery remained on track and should benefit from the spring buying season."

Wells Fargo's loan book also showed signs of life. Total lending rose 4 percent to $826.4 billion thanks to a 7 percent increase in commercial and industrial loans and an 11 percent increase in auto loans since the first quarter of 2013.

At the same time, the company is experiencing historically low loan losses. Its net charge-off rate was 0.41 percent in the latest quarter, versus 0.72 percent a year ago. It lost a mere $5 million on its $381.3 billion commercial loan portfolio.

Total revenue fell 3 percent to $20.6 billion from $21.3 billion a year earlier. Between $120 million and $130 million of that decline could be attributed to the first quarter having two fewer days, Sloan told analysts on the conference call.

Wells Fargo's net interest margin, a measure of the profitability of its loans, fell to 3.2 percent from 3.49 percent a year earlier and 3.27 percent in the fourth quarter.

The bank received regulatory approval in March to increase its quarterly dividend to 35 cents from 30 cents and to repurchase an additional $17 billion of stock, or about 6.5 percent of the total outstanding.

Bloomberg's Betty Liu and Alix Steel examine first-quarter results from Citigroup as profit and revenue came in higher than expectated. They speak on Bloomberg Television’s “In The Loop.” (Source: Bloomberg)
Citigroup Inc. (C) reported an unexpected profit increase and beat analysts’ estimates as the company recouped funds previously set aside for bad loans and cut losses at a division holding unwanted assets.

First-quarter net income climbed 3.5 percent to $3.94 billion, or $1.23 a share, from $3.81 billion, or $1.23, a year earlier, the New York-based company said today in a statement. Excluding accounting charges and a tax item, profit was $1.30 a share. The average estimate of 27 analysts surveyed by Bloomberg was $1.14.

Chief Executive Officer Michael Corbat, 53, is getting help from an improving global economy that’s making it easier for consumers and businesses to repay loans. Citigroup released $673 million in loan-loss reserves set aside in earlier years, exceeding the $500 million at Wells Fargo & Co. and the $227 million estimate of Matt O’Connor, a Deutsche Bank AG analyst.

“There is enough juice left in credit costs” to boost quarterly results for the industry, Chris Kotowski, an Oppenheimer & Co. analyst, wrote in an April 3 note. He assigns the equivalent of a buy rating to Citigroup’s stock.

Citigroup rose 3.5 percent to $47.29 in early New York trading.

Citi Holdings

Profit was also boosted by improving results in a portfolio of unwanted assets the bank has marked for sale. Losses in the Citi Holdings unit narrowed to $284 million in the first quarter from $804 million a year earlier, as mortgage results improved. Revenue at the division rose 61 percent from a year earlier to $1.46 billion.

  Photographer: Craig Warga/Bloomberg
The Citibank logo is displayed above a bank branch in New York. Close

The Citibank logo is displayed above a bank branch in New York.


Close
Open
Photographer: Craig Warga/Bloomberg
The Citibank logo is displayed above a bank branch in New York.

Total revenue for the quarter fell 1 percent to $20.1 billion as expenses also declined 1 percent to $12.1 billion. Analysts predicted revenue of $19.4 billion, according to the average of 19 estimates compiled by Bloomberg.

Corbat was dealt a setback to his turnaround plan last month when Citigroup failed an annual stress test administered by the Federal Reserve, which cited deficiencies in the bank’s ability to project revenue and losses in its global operations. Regulators rejected the firm’s request to quintuple its dividend and repurchase $6.4 billion of shares.

“Despite a quarter that was difficult for our company, we delivered strong results,” Corbat said in the statement. “Both our consumer and institutional businesses performed well and we grew both loans and deposits while holding the line on our expenses.”

ROE Goal

The stress-test rejection probably dents prospects for achieving Corbat’s 2015 goal of reaching a 10 percent return on tangible common equity, Matt Burnell, an analyst at Wells Fargo, wrote in an April 7 report.

  Photographer: Simon Dawson/Bloomberg
Citigroup Inc. Chief Executive Officer Michael Corbat is getting help from an improving global economy that’s making it easier for consumers and businesses to repay loans. Close


Close
Open
Photographer: Simon Dawson/Bloomberg
Citigroup Inc. Chief Executive Officer Michael Corbat is getting help from an improving global economy that’s making it easier for consumers and businesses to repay loans.

“The capital return path that we expected to become clearer in 2014 has been delayed,” Burnell wrote.

Citigroup Chief Financial Officer John Gerspach told investors March 3 that capital-markets revenue would drop by a “high mid-teens” percentage. Adjusted for accounting items, revenue from the markets and securities services division, which includes equity and bond trading, fell 12 percent to $5.18 billion.

Bond trading, which marred the company’s two prior quarterly earnings results, fell 18 percent to an adjusted $3.85 billion in the first quarter. Equity trading rose 13 percent to $883 million.

Revenue from bond trading at JPMorgan Chase & Co. (JPM) fell 21 percent to $3.76 billion, the New York-based bank said last week. Stock trading at JPMorgan declined 3 percent to $1.3 billion.

Profit at Citigroup’s global consumer-banking division dropped 6 percent to $1.72 billion as results were hurt by fewer U.S. mortgage refinancings, the company said.

The institutional business, which includes the investment bank and transaction services, posted profit of $2.94 billion, a 3 percent drop from a year earlier.

JPMorgan, the largest U.S. bank by assets, reported first-quarter profit of $5.27 billion, and San Francisco-based Wells Fargo posted record profit of $5.89 billion.

Corbat’s team is also investigating a suspected $400 million loan fraud at the company’s Mexico unit. The bank disclosed the matter on Feb. 28, and said it reduced 2013 profit by $235 million. Authorities including the Federal Bureau of Investigation are probing the matter.

‘Old’ Citigroup

The capital-plan rejection and regulatory investigations “brought back memories of the ‘same old Citigroup,’” Burnell wrote.

Corbat, in response to the stress-test failure, asked Eugene McQuade, the departing CEO of Citibank N.A., to cancel his retirement and lead the company’s submissions to the Fed over the next year, according to a memo obtained by Bloomberg News.

In the two weeks since failing the stress test, Citigroup reached a $1.13 billion settlement with bond investors and said it would sell its Honduran consumer bank and one-third of its branches in South Korea. The company also is in talks to sell its retail and credit-card business in Spain to Banco Popular Espanol SA, the Madrid-based lender said in a filing last week.

The number of in-store bank branches has fallen by 4.6 percent since June 30, 2011 to a total of 5,750.

JPMorgan lost 3.7 percent as profit fell 19 percent on lower fixed-income trading and mortgage revenue. Teradata Corp., Broadcom Corp. and Salesforce.com Inc. lost at least 3 percent as technology shares paced declines in the market after tumbling the most since 2012 yesterday. General Motors Co. dropped 4.1 percent after a U.S. congressional panel released documents related to a recall probe of the company.

The S&P 500 fell 0.9 percent to 1,815.69 at 4 p.m. in New York, closing at its lowest level in two months. The gauge slipped 2.7 percent this week, the biggest loss since 2012. The Nasdaq Composite Index dropped 1.3 percent today, capping its biggest two-day retreat since 2011, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average slid 143.47 points, or 0.9 percent, to 16,026.75. About 7.4 billion shares changed hands on U.S. exchanges, 5.8 percent higher than the three-month average.

“You need to shake out some of the speculative money and throw water on the irrational exuberance,” Randy Frederick, managing director of trading and derivatives at Charles Schwab Corp., which manages $2.2 trillion in client assets, said in a phone interview. “It’s a good reminder that markets don’t go straight up. While the long-term is positive, we need to have these steps back along the way. We need this kind of pullback.”

A U.S. recovery also may have less of an impact elsewhere because of the declining need for imported energy following advances in techniques at home such as hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling in shale rock. Already, net oil imports have fallen to about 5 million barrels a day from a peak of almost 13 million barrels in 2006, and the Energy Department said April 7 that imports may fall to zero by 2037.

The economic models of carbon mitigation (carbon reduction) and carbon adaptation (adapting to climate change) cut across many different sectors and types of financing. Their long-term trend is clear, according to bankers, but the short-term growth path is likely to be bumpy, as new sources of energy (for example, wind, solar, hydroelectric and waste), ‘green’ real estate and new transport technology (for cars, trucks, aircraft, railways and ships) battle traditional industries, and policy ebbs and flows in support of the transition. For example, carbon trading volumes have fallen.

Citi, JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America Merrill Lynch were planning to roll out their own Green Bond Principles on January 1, say Citi officials. According to a draft published by , the principles provide issuers of green bonds with disclosure and transparency guidelines.

However, the principles leave it up to each issuer, whether a corporate, bank or municipality, to decide which criteria to employ to define the green use of the bonds. (Several climate-friendly and environmental definitions that have already been used in the market by the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation, the European Investment Bank, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and others are listed in an appendix that green bond issuers may refer to if they want).

Meanwhile, Christopher Flensborg, head of sustainable products and product development at SEB, says another framework designed for a global green bond market and including input from banks in the US, European and Asia will be ready in “six to nine months”. It will be different in other important respects from the Citi, JPMorgan and Bank of America endeavour, which, Mr Flensborg says was “too rushed”. The Citi officials’ response is: “The market is not waiting. For example, Citi already has two mandates to lead manage green bond issues [in 2014].”

To avoid the confusion of different definitions of green, it is important to establish a single set of definitions, says Mr Flensborg. Some bankers also think scientists who have knowledge of climate change, but no economic interest in the development of the green bond market, should be involved in the definition and verification of a bond’s green use.

Mr Flensborg says he is not interested in picking a fight with other banks but rather in opening up a constructive discussion on what is needed for a framework that can guarantee the security and integrity of the green bond market. At the time of writing it was possible, but not at all certain, that the differences between the two groups might be reconciled, and that SEB and other banks might end up signing up to the Citi group’s proposal.

Meanwhile, Marshal Salant, Citi’s global head of alternative energy financing in capital markets, thinks standardisation in the green bond market could be helpful further along, for some smaller consumer markets, such as individual residences. He says if a customer “wants to borrow money to put a solar panel on their roof or pay for window insulation or replace a water heater, to upgrade their energy efficiency... if you had more standardised contracts we could pool those loans together and bring them to the asset-backed securities [market]”.

For some, this sounds as if green bonds, potentially with AAA credit ratings, high demand from yield-hungry investors and rapid expansion, will become the new asset class that will protect the world from climate catastrophe. For others, just the idea of thousands of ordinary US householders’ loans being combined and sliced and diced as securities underlying green bonds seems a throwback to the US housing bubble. For such pessimists, the green bond’s arrival, far from saving the world, could become the next financial nightmare.

But Mr Flensborg warns: “Unless there is a degree of governance, it is likely that good intentions will be abused by someone with less good intentions, and you may end up in a situation like in the US mortgage crisis, where there was basically an expansion in the sale of mortgages pushed by bankers who were only looking at the returns they could get for their dollars.” (See box, Green bond bubbles?)

A second initiative, the Equator Principles (EPs), a long-established globally referenced credit risk management framework, is to be extended in its latest updating to take effect this month. The role of the EPs will be broadened from the assessment and management of environmental and social risks of project finance – a specific type of lending relating to large-scale infrastructure projects such as power plants, pipelines, dams and mines – to all project-related corporate and bridge loans. In addition, the assessment and management of climate change and carbon emission risks will be addressed more prominently.

Banks that have signed up to the EPs now have to publish the greenhouse gas emissions for all projects they support when carbon emissions exceed 100,000 tonnes annually. And the sponsors of such projects (for example, energy companies and independent power producers) must do an analysis of a more energy-efficient alternative to the high carbon-emitting project.

John Graham, a principal environmental specialist at IFC, says: “We expect bringing the client to do this analysis will open their eyes to opportunities, for instance in terms of energy consumption and costs, that they may not have considered before.”

Piotr Mazurkiewicz, another IFC environmental specialist, commenting on the fact that some financial institutions have continued to support controversial projects such as the 1760-kilometre-long Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline, even after signing the EPs, says: “You can always challenge the consistency, the implementation, the disclosure and the transparency of different [EPs] banks. But the fact that the EPs are a common framework that they all agreed to, with 78 banks today from 35 countries now signed on and all using the same framework, is a big achievement.”

ING’s Ms Schreve, who is currently chair of the EPs, praises the initiative for creating a level playing field among banks. “[The EPs] enable us not to compete on environmental and social risk assessment and management. We all can give the same answers to our clients and use the same standards.” These standards are the IFC’s social and environmental performance standards and the World Bank’s environmental, health and safety guidelines, which provide direction on pollution prevention, and safety and best practice for 63 different industries.

Shawn Miller, global director for environmental and social risk management at Citi, a founding member of the EPs, believes the initiative helped set the sustainability movement in banking in motion. “In terms of changing banking and triggering sustainability across different banks in different regions, I think the EPs have been absolutely essential and a very useful tool,” he says.

While sustainability may be a vague term that can mean different things to different banks, in general it refers to a bank’s environmental and social risk assessment, and management designed to protect a client and the bank from potentially damaging exposure related to environmental mismanagement, for example an oil spill or deforestation, which can lead to business losses and reputation damage.

Meanwhile, UK bank Barclays has played a leading role, together with Cambridge University’s sustainability leadership programme, in setting up the Banking Environment Initiative (BEI), with 10 other global banks from Asia, Europe, the US and Latin America (BNY Mellon, China Construction Bank, Deutsche Bank, Lloyds Banking Group, Nomura, Northern Trust, Santander, Sumitomo, Mitsui and Westpac).

Barclays vice-chairman of corporate banking Jeremy Wilson says that the initiative was to “see whether we, as an industry, can, with our corporate clients, do more than we are able to do at the moment. The question was: everyone knows the Equator Principles are there. But could more be done?” He continues: “The first thing we did was to establish a principle that the banks in the group would not do anything without working in conjunction with their (corporate) clients.”

Out of this collaboration, the BEI has developed various work streams; some nearer fruition than others. For instance, one collaboration with the Consumer Goods Forum, which has 400 companies and a combined procurement power of more than $3000bn, according to the BEI, has led to a proposal for a “sustainable shipment” business model in global trade finance. The idea is that banks could provide financial incentives to companies trading sustainably produced soft commodities, such as palm oil, soy, timber products and beef, which are widely believed to now cause the most tropical forest destruction, the BEI says. This business model, which has the dual aim of driving sustainability more broadly in the supply chains of major trading companies and manufacturers, and achieving net deforestation in the production of soft commodities by 2020, could be formally unveiled this month.

Meanwhile in another collaboration, banks and US, European and Chinese electricity companies are working on a business model to help level the playing field and balance the risks and rewards of investing in fossil-fuel companies and renewable energy technologies.

The BEI says discussions here have focused on the inadequacies of current ways of valuing energy investments, where a purely price-based financial analysis fails to take account of the uncertainties of current policies and regulations, and the fact they are not static. For example, India, Japan and several European countries have carbon or carbon-related taxes, China is considering introducing them and changes are under way in the US.

As part of president Barack Obama’s Climate Action Plan, announced in June 2013 by the US Environmental Protection Agency, the US has introduced tough rules for limiting carbon emissions by new power plants. It has also pledged to set more controversial carbon pollution limits for existing US power plants before the end of President Obama’s second term in January 2017 (see box, World’s biggest solar power plant).

In these circumstances, the BEI proposes that a more accurate way to value energy companies in capital markets could be provided by an options valuation system. This could make investment in a marginal or non-viable clean energy project attractive when taking risk asymmetries into account. For example, a US onshore wind generation project, which is now non-viable when compared with the current low grid prices of US onshore natural gas (due to the discovery of major shale gas deposits) would, in a greener policy and regulatory world, have advantages in terms of risks that are greater than the disadvantages.

Bank of America says its branch banking network could drop below 5000 next year as mobile channels continue to take market share. In an earnings call Wednesday, Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan revealed that the bank has spent almost "half a billion dollars" on mobile products and services over the past three or four years. The outlay has been rewarded with continued growth in customer numbers banking through their handsets, rising to 14.4 million, from 12 million a year ago. Mobile cheque deposit, a relatively new service introduced in 2012, now accounts for nine percent of all cheques presented to the bank. Expanding on the implications for branch banking, BofA CFO Bruce Thompson said the number of physical bricks and mortar locations will contract further this year. The total number of branches - which fell to 5,151 in Q4 from 5,478 a year earlier - could drop to less than 5000 by year's end, Thomson said. US banks have been experimenting with different formats for their high street outlets over the past year, cutting acreage and adding more tech and sales staff into the mix. JPMorgan Chase, which opened a new Apple Store-style branch in lower Manhattan last year, has so far bucked the trend for branch closures, adding net new numbers to its real estate network as rival banks contracted. This could be about to change according to Seeking Alpha , which reported yesterday that the bank "announced its dropped plans to add new branches".

Banks are in a uniquely well-suited position to attract mobile shoppers, which will be the first step towards gaining customer engagement with mobile wallets, says Teresa Epperson, a managing director at AlixPartners, a consulting firm. Customers are already using mobile shopping apps and banks have a wealth of transaction data to understand the purchase behavior of their customers. This will help banks offer their customers a personalized mobile shopping experience, Epperson says.

“Consumers are now comfortable with their bank mining their data. They know it’s happening, so why can’t they get something out of it? It’s a tremendous opportunity for shopping offers based on transactional data,” she explains.

Some banks are already trying to attract mobile shopping customers with coupon offers, like Bank of America with BankAmeriDeals. And research released by AlixPartners this past December shows that customers - particularly young customers - are already highly engaged with mobile shopping apps. The research found that 60% of those aged 18-25 said they used mobile shopping apps that provide discounts or coupons to specific retailers. Even 50% of slightly older customers between the ages of 35-44 were found to be using such apps.

The research also points the way to designing a mobile shopping experience that truly interests customers, Epperson says. AlixPartners found that customer usage dropped off when asked about coupon aggregators like Groupon and Living Social. Only 38% of those between the ages of 18-25 said they used coupon aggregators, with similar drops across other age groups. The offers from these aggregators just aren’t as relevant, Epperson explains. But banks have the existing customer relationship and transactional data that can allow them to make more relevant offers to their customers, which will result in higher redemption rates, Epperson says. Customers want coupon and discount offers, the research shows, as only 27% of mobile shopping app users said that being offered a discount on an item they want would have no impact on their decision about where to buy that item.

Starting with the ability to offer those targeted discounts, banks can then look to add a more detailed and engaging customer experience to their mobile shopping offers, Epperson adds. She identifies three areas that any mobile shopping app should take into account: the value of the coupon offer, a social sharing aspect and an entertainment or gaming element. When AlixPartners asked mobile shopping customers how important each of these elements is to them, 19% responded that all three are very important, while 33% said that all three carry at least some significance. “Success in mobile shopping offers depends on all three areas. “You can’t just go all out on the discount value proposition,” Epperson advises.

Banks can add a social element to the mobile shopping experience by simply allowing customers to share coupons with others through their social media networks, she says. And that social element feeds into a gaming aspect since it provides a level of competition, like when a customer want to become the mayor of a specific store or retailer on Foursquare, she adds. If the customer succeeds in becoming mayor they could be offered a special discount for their loyalty through the shopping app.

All of this pre-purchase activity in shopping, sharing and gaming that the mobile shopping app can offer is really a precursor to the coming adoption of mobile wallets, Epperson says. Banks that can offer this kind of shopping experience will be well-placed to participate in the mobile wallet world. “This pre-shopping activity really captures customers. This changes the purchase experience for customers. Then when mobile wallets come around they will be able to store receipts and understand the transaction data. The mobile wallet will become my personal shopping helper,” Epperson predicts.

Rounding up snakes might sound like a risky business. Yet, to Jeff Holland, Texas-bred managing director and co-founder of $5 billion London-based Liongate Capital Management, as long as the risks are well managed, hunting snakes means good eating.

Perhaps it was this unusual familiarity with managing risk from an early age that inspired Holland to co-found Liongate in 2003 with current chief investment officer Randall Dillard.

In contrast to the traditional concierge model of the day, Liongate was born of a desire to manage allocations and risk in a more dynamic way. "Responding to changes in the macroeconomic environment means being more dynamic, which, in turn, means having a pretty good handle on the risks associated with underlying managers," Holland says.

Holland comes from investment banking, having left Deutsche Bank to co-found Liongate in the wake of the dotcom bubble. The growing hedge fund industry appealed because of Holland's "genuine belief in the superior risk management techniques hedge strategies bring to investors' portfolios".

Dillard previously served as managing director of investment banking and founding global head of merchant banking within Nomura International after a stint at Merrill Lynch International. A student of US and public international law, his early career focused on sovereign and corporate finance law with Clifford Chance. At Pembroke College, Cambridge, he established the Randall Dillard fellowship for post-doctoral research in international relations and conflict resolution.

Liongate's objective remains to deliver consistent returns with low correlation through a top-down dynamic investment process combining strategy allocation and manager selection driven by the macroeconomic environment.

The top-down allocation process focuses on niche and mid-sized managers with discrete investment strategies and, preferably, less than $2.5 billion in assets under management (AUM), which allows for lower correlation between managers and higher risk-adjusted returns, Holland argues. To remain "market current", portfolios are reweighted by 3-5% monthly, resulting in an historical portfolio weight turnover of 40%.

One of the hard limits Liongate sets as part of its manager selection is an insistence on full transparency of key exposures. This "superior information", as Holland puts it, allows Liongate to aggregate asset exposures and subsequently change portfolio weights and improve risk analysis. Although this approach is more common among funds of hedge funds (FoHFs) today, Liongate claims to be a pioneer of total portfolio risk management and has provided exposure reports with granular transparency of aggregate portfolio risk since 2006.

"At the time there weren't any other credible peers who were looking at risk in such a detailed and comprehensive way," Holland claims.

The approach to portfolio management soon paid off. "In 2007, we avoided a lot of the issues in credit and we even made quite a lot of money shorting both corporate credit and subprime," explains Holland. "In 2008 our flagship fund was down less than 10% in a year when most of our peers were down 20% to 25%. This dynamic approach and transparency on the underlying managers has really worked in the portfolio and, since the crisis, has been adopted by most of our peers."

Like most funds of funds, however, Liongate lost assets in 2008 and early 2009 as investors redeemed in excess of $1 billion. Superior risk and liquidity management quickly became critical differentiating factors as the FoHF industry haemorrhaged assets. Figures from Hedge Fund Research show net outflows from FoHFs of just under $42 billion in 2008, more than $118 billion in 2009 and nearly $12 billion in 2010.

"In 2008 we were able to pay back our investors in full without restricting liquidity in any way or using side-pockets, which was pretty rare at the time," says Holland. "In fact, 2009 and the latter part of 2010 were very good years for us with over $2 billion net inflows. This was highly unusual for a mid-sized FoHF and was almost entirely institutional money."

The institutionalisation of hedge fund investing has posed serious challenges to FoHFs, especially given their general failure to protect against downside risk or rogue traders in the months and years following the crisis. The asset drain continues, with 2013 seeing more than $20 billion in outflows, according to Hedge Fund Research, as institutions increasingly favour direct investment.

Barclays Prime Services estimates the continued pressure on FoHFs' fees and assets will see an overall decrease in their total fee pool of 10% between 2012 and 2014. While this indicates an overall decline, their research concludes that large FoHFs should be in a unique position, given their scale and deep and broad expertise of hedge fund investment, to provide a ‘one-stop shop' solution platform.

Size matters
In the battle for survival, the rules of the game have changed. The old relationship-driven concierge model of commingled funds is becoming increasingly extinct, which has forced a cleansing of the hedge fund industry. Scale, portfolio risk management and the ability to provide highly tailored solutions now sit at the heart of the industry's value proposition.

The turning point was 2008.

"After the dotcom bubble burst, during which time hedge funds had performed well, private and institutional investors realised hedge funds were worth pursuing," Holland explains. "In those heady days there was less capital in the industry and returns were easier to come by. Many funds of funds were about relationships and were founded on the belief if they spanned a number of strategies they would be quite well diversified. They weren't capable of thinking about risk in a more sophisticated way."

He continues: "And they were adding value. Investors didn't know enough about hedge funds to consider going direct, so even the simplest approach did add value. That simplistic approach caused problems later on when a lot of managers were caught out by the poor quality of their due diligence."

2008 was the last year when FoHF launches outnumbered closures. Since then, the gap between closures and launches has continued to widen, peaking at a ratio of around three closures for every launch in 2012, according to Eurekahedge. New launches fell from around 500 in 2006 to about 40 in 2013 while net subscriptions also fell away. In 2013 there was only one month, July, in which investors added net assets ($4.9 billion) to the FoHF industry.

A raft of mergers and marriages has taken place as FoHFs grapple with a new world order where size clearly matters. The tide of consolidation continues apace. In recent months two significant deals have been announced that will create large-scale FoHFs. Tages Capital and La Française announced in February they were merging their FoHFs into a $3 billion vehicle. In December Swiss FoHF Gottex Fund Management Holdings announced it would be buying EIM Group, leading to a combined AUM of roughly $10 billion.

"This kind of partnership is driven by funds of funds coming together to gain scale and credibility as a global firm," Holland suggests, "and often larger seems better to institutions in our industry."

Liongate itself forged a partnership in 2013 with asset management giant Principal Global Investors (PGI), which has more than $300 billion AUM.

"PGI is the largest provider of retirement platforms to small and medium-sized companies in the US and has a pretty large team of relationship managers for institutional clients, with about $100 billion in institutional assets globally, so it is attractive for us to leverage that resource," Holland says.

Growth onshore
Rather than gathering scale, though, the marriage with PGI is designed to address a significant change in the hedge fund arena - the increasing demand and regulatory push for onshore alternative vehicles.

"The driver behind this deal is really anticipated growth of regulated alternative mutual funds in the US under the 1940 Investment Company Act," Holland says. "PGI already has a multi-strategy hedged regulated portfolio of over $1.2 billion. The plan is for us to work together to build out a strategy for distribution in the alternative mutual fund space."

The attractions of launching '40 Act funds have not gone unnoticed. More than half of 133 hedge fund managers surveyed by New York-based research firm Infovest21 in June 2013 had or were considering launching a '40 Act mutual fund. Another 25% were or are considering sub-advising to a '40 Act fund. The primary motivations cited by respondents for offering '40 Act funds were investor demand (63%), another way to broaden their investor base (51%), and another way to build assets (44%).

According to consultant McKinsey & Company, alternative investments are likely to account for one quarter of retail revenues and the majority of the growth in assets under management by 2015.

"So far, the products offered through partnerships with legacy FoHF firms are leading the market," Holland believes.

Fidelity's partnership with Arden Asset Management is a notable example, having gathered more than $1 billion between inception in December 2012 and the end of October 2013. The partnerships resulting from the acquisitions of Fauchier Partners by Permal Asset Management, K2 by Franklin Templeton and Rock Creek by Wells Fargo have all led to product launches and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts is believed to be planning a launch after its acquisition of Prisma.'

PGI's Principal Global Multi-Strategy Fund, which launched in October 2011, is the largest such '40 Act mutual fund with $1.2 billion at end of 2013, followed by Blackstone's Alternative Multi-Manager Fund with $1.1 billion (inception July 2013).

Regulators on both sides of the Atlantic have been pushing the alternative asset management industry onshore and, post-2008, investors' demand for more liquid, regulated vehicles was expected to drive significant demand. In Europe hedge funds adopted the Ucits banner to launch products, although to date demand has been relatively muted.

Performance differential
With any onshore framework, '40 Act and Ucits included, hedge fund strategies need to be adapted to fit within the regulatory limitations. This creates a natural trade-off between liquidity and performance. Under the '40 Act rules, for example, at least 75% of portfolio assets must be represented by cash and cash-like investments, government securities, those of other investment companies and other securities, which are limited to 5% per security. Sector exposure is limited to 25%, as is the maximum percentage of assets invested in a single issuer (excluding the US government). No more than 15% of the portfolio can be invested in illiquid assets and the fund's net assets must be at least three times aggregate borrowings, limiting leverage to 33%. These structures also entail higher agency costs, lower fees, no performance fees and a more limited talent pool.

"Constrained portfolios will generate lower returns than private hedge funds," Holland says. "Some strategies are more easily adapted, such as macro strategies that can use derivatives effectively to overcome liquidity and leverage requirements within the '40 Act rules."

Infovest21's survey showed equity long/short as the most popular strategy among '40 Act managers, with 37% listing it as their primary strategy, almost twice as many as managed futures (18%), the second-most popular strategy. The research also found managers widely reported hedge fund performance has been higher than the mutual fund counterpart. On a year-to-year basis from January to June 2013, hedge funds returned 6.8% compared with 4.1% for '40 Act funds.

Alternative Ucits, although still a work in progress, also sets minimum liquidity requirements and restrictions on what securities can be traded. The rules in this regard are still evolving and are expected to continue tightening. In February, new rules came into effect banning the use of total return swaps and trading of commodity sub-indexes (www.risk.net/2256964). Both presented further limitations on the ability of alternative asset managers to efficiently replicate their strategies within the Ucits framework. Several commodities managers, for example, withdrew products from the market.

"Ucits can be really limiting," Holland states. "It might mean investors can sleep a little better, but they are giving up return to do so, which is not a good trade-off. If an institutional investor is doing the necessary due diligence, they don't need the Ucits framework and can get a better return elsewhere."

The introduction of the alternative investment fund managers directive (AIFMD) in Europe provides an alternative for institutions to access hedge fund returns within a regulatory framework, but without the inherent performance drag caused by the more restrictive Ucits rules. AIFMD places no restrictions, for example, on the use of derivatives.

"AIFMD will overtake the hedge funds base in Europe in respect to institutional allocations," Holland predicts. "Ucits was designed for retail clients and its future is more in that space. While there is a clear trend in the US for retail uptake of onshore hedge funds, the trend in Europe is less clear. If there is a period of equity market volatility that could be a catalyst for retail investors to start allocating to hedge funds through Ucits, but the trend today is less certain than in the US."

Although Holland believes issues arising from lack of regulation can be overcome by good due diligence, he remains a cautious fan of a more regulated hedge fund world. "Increased regulation is healthy for investors and for the industry. If it increases investors' comfort with hedge funds and in the securities hedge funds are trading, then ultimately that has to be positive for investors and good for the industry. Regulation is something we generally welcome, provided it is prudent and cost-efficient for investors," he says. "The move to regulate derivatives trading and push more of this activity onto exchanges, for example, is good in principle."

He continues: "The question though is what it all costs, whether it limits the opportunity to trade profitably and whether it stifles the entrepreneurial spirit of the hedge fund industry by making it harder for good traders to leave banks and start up their own funds."

Risk efficiency
Regulated frameworks have another hindering aspect for investors. By limiting how much risk a manager can take and how they implement their ideas, they can significantly decrease the efficiency of the risk an investor is taking.

Risk efficiency is something Holland is keenly focused on maximising.

"Alpha can be fairly elusive," he explains. "Many underlying managers have a fairly limited number of high-conviction ideas in their portfolios that they've done a lot of research on and are likely to produce the most alpha. The rest of the portfolio is often much more passive stakes in positions that peers are invested in or even positions on indexes, which are less likely to produce alpha. These positions become a sort of noise in the portfolio."

Holland adds: "We want to cut those inefficient exposures, but it can be a challenge to get managers to take more risk. What Liongate has done in the past is work with the manager on a defined mandate that is focused more on their core trading ability and high-conviction ideas."

Moving into a more stable macroeconomic environment, Liongate's comfort with increasing risk and concentration is growing. "Not in fixed income or credit," Holland is quick to say, "but more through equity driven or niche strategies that are not dependent on movement of equities or rates. We are always interested in these esoteric strategies, but we feel now is a good time for event driven managers." Liongate made a number of partial redemptions within portfolios at the end of last year to allow for rebalancing towards event driven strategies.

As the result of corporate war chests and an availability of cheap financing, equity markets behaved reasonably rationally in 2013 and correlations returned to more normal levels. That should present a better opportunity for equity long/short and event driven managers.

"We tend to favour really good event driven over equity long/short managers because the potential for alpha creation is greater," explains Holland. "Event driven managers tend to have more concentrated portfolios as well. Activist managers are a very good example of where deploying more capital into each bet is better. Concentrating capital is something they need to do to achieve scale. The philosophy we have always had in our portfolios is that we prefer a more concentrated, higher-conviction approach."

Providing highly risk-efficient tailored portfolios is a key part of Liongate's offering to institutional investors in a world where FoHFs increasingly have to demonstrate the value they add to survive and prosper.

"It's part of our philosophy as a firm," Holland states. "We can add value to our investors by tailoring mandates with individual hedge fund managers to focus on the best part of their portfolio and define a mandate through a managed account. We want to do more of this in the future and our investors have so far responded favourably to this more sophisticated approach."

He adds: "It increases the efficiency of the risk being taken against the fees being paid. At the heart, that's exactly what it is about."

Fund of funds revolution
The focus on increasing rewards for every unit of risk taken by institutional investors is helping drive many back to legacy funds of funds, an emerging trend Liongate is also experiencing. Having lost some institutional clients to the world of direct investing post-2008, Holland reports some clients have begun returning, but the nature of the relationship has changed.

Post-2008, many institutions made direct allocations - in 2009 and 2010 - to large global macro managers, many of which were "good credible managers, who performed well during 2008", Holland says, "but macro has been a pretty challenging space and many of those institutions have since been nursing losses."

Holland continues: "It is ironic that many institutions criticised funds of funds in 2008 for their relatively simplistic approach to portfolio allocation, but have subsequently adopted what appears to be a rather simplistic approach to their portfolios themselves."

He adds: "Many of these clients have after all realised they do need help with portfolio construction, strategy allocation and manager selection. They want to retain custody of their assets, but need help understanding risks."

As a result, Liongate is increasingly acting in an advisory capacity to clients and has become more focused on providing solutions rather than commingled funds. Of Liongate's total $5 billion AUM, the majority ($3 billion) is under advisory.

"We think of our business more as trusted advisers now," says Holland. "Particularly larger clients increasingly want this kind of relationship and in many cases we have set up dedicated portfolios tailored to the objectives of the client. This is a more solution-based approach than we had taken in the past and is very much the trend across the FoHF industry."

The fees charged on these services, whether in an advisory or portfolio management capacity, naturally have a significant impact not just on investors' perception of value for money, but also on risk efficiency itself.

"Different investors have different views on the appropriate level and structure of fees. The beauty of dedicated portfolios and advisory relationships is that they allow us to tailor a fee structure for each individual client. Some clients prefer to pay a fixed management fee and no performance fee, while some like a combination of the two, and some clients want performance-fee-only mandates," Holland states.

"The fee is something that is determined by the value a client receives and no one fee is appropriate for all mandates. That is also true of individual hedge funds. We're pretty open to structuring a fee in a way that's appropriate to each client."

He insists: "It is worth paying for genuine alpha, as it is for very good management of data, more sophisticated risk management and highly tailored solutions. That is true in any industry."

Morgan Stanley shareholders will find out this week whether the U.S. Federal Reserve will allow the bank to start returning capital to shareholders in a meaningful way for the first time since the financial crisis.

But even if the Wall Street bank gets the Fed's blessing to buy back more shares and potentially raise its dividend, it is unlikely to hit a shareholder return target Chief Executive James Gorman set out for this year, analysts and investors said.

The target, called return on equity (ROE), measures how much profit a bank makes using shareholder funds. An ROE of at least 10 percent would show that Morgan Stanley can earn enough to pay for new capital and signal that the bank is past the restructuring it needed to make after the financial crisis. Morgan Stanley's annual return on equity has languished below 10 percent since 2006.

If the bank cannot jump that hurdle in the near term, which could be done by boosting profits, buying back shares, or both, shareholders may get impatient and demand that management outline a bolder strategy to boost profits.

"They should be generating double-digit ROEs, and if they aren't, what are they going to do about it?" said Mike Mayo, a longtime bank analyst at CLSA. He raised a similar question at Morgan Stanley's annual meeting last year, prompting Gorman to say the bank would meet the 10 percent target some time in 2014.

STRESS TEST PASSED

Last week, the Fed said Morgan Stanley passed its annual stress test, a requirement of the Dodd-Frank financial reform legislation that examines how well big banks' balance sheets would hold up in hypothetical crises.

As part of the test, banks submitted capital plans, including how much they would like to spend buying back stock and paying out dividends. On Wednesday, the Fed will say whether those plans have been approved, and how much each bank can spend.

Morgan Stanley, the sixth largest U.S. bank by assets, has been paying only a nominal dividend since the financial crisis and has not had a meaningful stock buyback program since 2006.

Gorman recently referred to Morgan Stanley's 5-cent quarterly dividend as "distressed," even though he said the bank is in a position of financial strength. Bank of America Corp and Citigroup Inc pay lower quarterly dividends of a penny, while Goldman Sachs Group Inc pays 55 cents, JPMorgan Chase & Co pays 38 cents and Wells Fargo & Co pays 30 cents. All of those banks bought back more stock than Morgan Stanley last year in dollar terms.

Morgan Stanley has paid little cash back to investors because it had a bigger priority: funding its purchase of the Smith Barney brokerage business from Citigroup, a deal executed over four and a half years that was finished in June and ultimately cost Morgan Stanley $11.7 billion.

"We have been, for the last couple of years, quite conservative and deliberately so," Gorman said in a recent interview with Fox Business Network. But, he added, now that the bank has clearly recovered from the crisis, he wants capital returns to reflect that strength.

Morgan Stanley declined to comment about its proposed buyback and dividend plans or the implications for ROE.

Despite some concerns of ROE, the stock was among the best performers in the financial sector last year, up 64 percent in 2013, and shares have more than doubled since their post-crisis low of $12.36 in 2012. Shares are up 3.4 percent year-to-date, closing at $32.44 on Monday.

Some investors and analysts say it is less important that Morgan Stanley hits Gorman's return-on-equity goal this year than that its returns are moving in the right direction.

"They've had to get their balance sheet back in order, and now it's time to start sending some of that money toward shareholders," said Michael Cuggino, president and portfolio manager of the Permanent Portfolio Family of Funds, which owns Morgan Stanley shares. "But they don't have 100 percent control when it comes to meeting their ROE targets. It gets back to the question of, 'What does the Fed have to say?'"

WAITING FOR THE FED

How much the Fed will allow Morgan Stanley to spend on buybacks will affect how fast it can hit the 10 percent target, which would be more than double the 4.3 percent ROE it delivered in 2013.

Morgan Stanley's returns were weighed down by one-time litigation costs, an accounting charge and the cost of the Smith Barney purchase. This year's profits are expected to be helped by higher earnings from that business as well as a reduction of fixed-income trading assets that are costly under new regulations.

Although analysts expect Morgan Stanley's profits to jump 62 percent this year, many still describe Gorman's 2014 goal as aggressive.

It would require Morgan Stanley to exceed analysts' earnings expectations by a substantial amount, or buy back more stock than analysts expect the Fed to allow.

Morgan Stanley started buying back stock last year for the first time since 2006. It announced a $500 million repurchase program in July, and used $350 million worth of that authorization before year-end.

Even with those repurchases, Morgan Stanley's outstanding share count increased by 2 percent last year because of shares issued as part of compensation. By comparison, its chief rival Goldman Sachs has spent $21 billion repurchasing shares since 2010, reducing outstanding stock by 15 percent, and has increased its dividend twice.

Analysts are estimating that Morgan Stanley will buy back about $700 million worth of stock this year on a net basis, on average, according to ISI Group. The bank would need to buy back nearly 20 times that amount to hit a 10 percent ROE target, based on the average analyst earnings estimate.

Instead, analysts are forecasting a return-on-equity of 7.5 percent this year, on average, according to Thomson Reuters data. Next year, analysts estimate Morgan Stanley will reach an ROE of 8.6 percent, on average. Analysts do not expect the bank to hit 10 percent on a quarterly or annual basis in either year.

he Federal Reserve on Wednesday rejected Citigroup Inc's plans to buy back $6.4 billion of shares and boost dividends, saying the bank is not sufficiently prepared to handle a potential financial crisis.

The decision marks the second time in three years that Citigroup has failed to win the Fed's approval for its plan to return money to shareholders, known as the "capital plan."

Officials at the bank never saw the rejection coming, a source close to the matter said on Wednesday.

The rejection underscores that whatever strides Citi's chief executive, Michael Corbat, has made in fixing the bank's difficulties, he still has work to do. Shares of Citigroup, the third-largest U.S. bank, fell 5.4 percent to $47.45 in after-hours trading.

Since taking the reins at the bank in 2012, Corbat has been working hard to cultivate close relationships with regulators in Washington. His predecessor, Vikram Pandit, had a famously testy relationship with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp's then chairman Sheila Bair, among other regulators.

But even after mending fences in Washington, Corbat was blindsided by the Fed's decision to nix his plan for paying out money to shareholders. His first hint that something might be awry with the bank's capital plans came last week, when the Fed disclosed its views of how global turmoil would affect the bank's capital levels, the source said. The Fed's projections were much less rosy than Citi's.

The bank, like its competitors, faces two opposing goals. It wants to have large amounts of capital to please regulators; it also wants to please its shareholders, and high levels of capital weigh on profitability.

Citi was one of five banks whose payout plans were rejected by the Fed on Wednesday. Three were the U.S. units of European banks. The fifth, Zions Bancorp, was expected because it was the only bank last week to fail a model run of a simulated crisis similar to the 2007-09 credit meltdown in the first part of the Fed's stress tests.

The Fed said it approved capital plans submitted by the remaining 25 big banks in this year's tests.

Corbat, said in a statement that the Citigroup is "deeply disappointed" by the Fed's decision and that the bank's request for returning additional capital to shareholders was modest.

Last year, the Fed granted Citigroup permission to buy back $1.2 billion worth of shares and said it could continue to pay $120 million a year in dividends, representing a quarterly rate of a penny a share.

This year Citigroup sought to spend more than five times as much buying back shares and to lift its quarterly dividend to 5 cents a share. The bank earned $13.67 billion last year.

Analysts, on average, had estimated that Citigroup's quarterly dividend would increase to 12 cents per share, according to surveys by Thomson Reuters.

ANALYSTS SEE PROBLEMS IN CITI'S COMPLEXITY

On Wednesday, the Fed said that Citigroup has improved its risk management practices in recent years, but the bank cannot determine well enough how its revenue and income would be hurt under stressful scenarios around the world. The bank's internal examination process does not sufficiently consider how global crises could influence its broad number of businesses, the Fed added.

In 2012, the Fed rejected the plan by Citi's then CEO Pandit, a step that contributed to his ouster in October of that year. In the 2012 test, Citigroup did not prove to the Fed's satisfaction that it could adequately measure risk in loans to some consumers in Southeast Asia, where credit rating standards are not as well developed as in the United States, according to a person familiar with the matter.

The Fed said on Wednesday that some of Citigroup's deficiencies had been "previously identified by supervisors as requiring attention" and that "there was not sufficient improvement."

A Fed official said that regulators had raised their expectations for banks with each set of stress tests, and it expected improvements in areas that had previously been identified as needing work.

Citigroup's complexity -- it operates in over 100 countries, and was built over decades of acquisitions -- may be working against it, analysts said.

"Citi needs to make this defeat into victory by improving the pace of restructuring," said Mike Mayo, an analyst at CLSA, saying the bank should consider breaking itself up more dramatically than it already has.

The other banks blocked by the Fed on Wednesday in their plans for higher dividends or share buybacks were the U.S. units of HSBC, RBS and Santander, due to weaknesses in their capital planning processes.

Zions, the fifth bank whose plan was barred, was the only bank out of 30 to miss minimum hurdles for regulatory capital in a first stage of the stress tests, which simulate a future crisis as severe as the 2007-09 credit meltdown.

"Both the firms and supervisors have more work to do as we continue to raise expectations for the quality of risk management in the nation's largest banks," Fed Governor Daniel Tarullo said in a statement on Wednesday.

The five banks can continue with shareholder payouts at the same pace as they did last year. They can also change their proposals and resubmit them, a move that Citigroup said it is considering.

Fed officials told reporters that capital distributions at the banks had been sufficiently modest in past years that they could continue at current levels without hurting the firms.

The Fed's criticism of internal controls, risk-identification and other planning elements at the foreign banks underscores regulators' concerns about the safety of those firms' operations in the United States.

Foreign banks will have to wall off their U.S. units and meet tougher capital requirements under rules recently finalized by the Fed.

The Fed has said HSBC, RBS and Santander all would likely fall under those new rules.

Two large Wall Street banks, Bank of America and Goldman Sachs, had to resubmit their capital plans after seeing their first set of stress test results.

Bank of America received approval to increase its quarterly dividend to 5 cents per share from 1 cent per share previously, and approval for the authorization a new $4.0 billion share buyback program. Last year, the Federal Reserve approved Bank of America's request to redeem $5.5 billion in preferred stock and $5.0 billion in common shares.

The annual tests aim to determine whether banks are robust enough to weather the next crisis. Under the toughest stress scenario considered this year, the banks had to show how they would cope with the stock market falling by 50 percent. The eight biggest banks had to weigh the impact of a default by their largest derivatives trading counterparty.

Last week, the Fed looked at what the banks' capital levels would look like in stress scenarios, assuming they did not change their payouts to investors. In the results released on Wednesday, regulators looked at whether banks could carry out their planned capital distributions and still maintain a buffer in a downturn.

US bank JP Morgan again led the league tables for 2013 revenue, according to consultancy Coalition, but was followed by four banks in second place: Goldman Sachs, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Deutsche Bank and Citigroup.

Those four banks tied under Coalition’s methodology, which awards equal ranks to banks with performance within 5% of the top bank in a given category.

By contrast, in the 2012 table, Goldman ranked second followed by Bank of America, Citi and Deutsche, which tied for third.

The Coalition league table tracks the performance of the top 10 investment banks globally, using financial disclosures, investor presentations, media articles and independent research to benchmark investment bank results. The consultancy says adjustments are made to the publicly reported results to try and ensure the results are like-for-like, with accounting adjustments stripped out for example.

Coalition for the first time broke out the top banks by region. In Europe, Deutsche Bank took first, followed by JP Morgan in second place and Goldman in third. In the Americas, however, JP Morgan topped the chart followed by Bank of America in second and Goldman in third.

Deutsche Bank also took first place in Asia bolstered by its FICC business there, followed by Japanese bank Nomura and Citi, which tied for second place. Deutsche highlighted its growing market share in Asia fixed income in its annual report, citing research from Greenwich Associates that showed its market share in APAC ex-Japan at 9%, up from 8.7% the previous year.

Last year the bank integrated its rates, flow credit trading, foreign exchange and global liquidity management into its fixed income and currencies business. The bank noted in its full year earnings report that while revenues from the combined unit were lower year-on-year, the fixed income business had been ranked first place by Greenwich based on market share for the fourth consecutive year.

Within the investment banking division ranking, which includes mergers and acquisitions work as well as equity and debt capital market activity, JP Morgan tied with Bank of America for first place, followed by Goldman Sachs in third. In 2012, JP Morgan came in first followed by Bank of America in second place and Goldman Sachs in third, according to Coalition.

When it comes to equities work, which includes cash equities, futures and options, prime services and equity derivatives and convertibles, the leaders were also neck-and-neck. JP Morgan, Goldman and Morgan Stanley tied for first place. In 2012, Goldman Sachs led the pack with JP Morgan and Morgan Stanley tied for second place.

In fixed income, currencies and commodities businesses, which posed challenges for banks last year, the top three banks held their rankings, with JP Morgan in first followed by Citi in second place and Deutsche in third.

US banks chopped almost 1500 branches in 2013 in an effort to offset sluggish revenue trends amid a slow-growth environment, according to data from SNL Financial. The report cites the actions of KeyCorp, which in mid-2012 launched a company-wide efficiency initiative aimed at carving out costs and boosting the bank's bottom line. Between June 2012 and the end of 2013, the Cleveland-based company consolidated 81 branch locations, or approximately eight percent of its franchise. Over the past 18 months, Key implemented annualised cost savings of $241 million. Bank of America, PNC Financial Services Group Inc. and SunTrust Banks closed even more branches than Key during 2013, as consumers shunned the high street in favour of online and mobile banking. Bank of America cut 327 branches from its network in 2013 and expects to cull even more in 2014 as mobile channels continue to take market share. Capital One Financial, Hancock Holding and Citigroup are among other institutions looking to reduce the fixed expenses tied to large branch networks, SNL's report highlights. In addition to shuttering or selling off branches, many banks are also working to remodel their branch networks, downsizing branches, packing them with self-service tech and using fewer staff to perform routine transactions, exemplified by Wells Fargo's experiment with mini-branches and PNC's pop-up branches.

The departure of Conway represents a blow to the US bank's efforts to win business with private equity firms, the source of a growing percentage of total investment banking revenues.

The regulatory changes enacted over the past few years have had a significant impact on banks’ ability to generate revenue.

“Having the whole view of big data allows funds to really dig into and better understand member behaviour, drive far more predictive analysis of member activity and secure more detailed insights into the cost and revenue drivers across different customer segments. This, in turn, will enable funds, on a whole new level, to more actively manage costs, foresee fund outflows, retain members and cross sell related products,” he said.

The firm also cites the Durbin Amendment to the Dodd-Frank Act which slashed interchange fees, prompting banks to reinstitute current account fees in a bid to claw back revenues. This in turn has seen customers look elsewhere, providing an opportunity for the likes of American Express and Walmart, who teamed up on their Bluebird card in late 2012. However, the pre-paid industry is now coming under regulatory scrutiny itself, with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), targeting May for proposed new rules covering issues such as fees on prepaid cards. Meanwhile, Senator Mark Warner has recently introduced a bill that would require new disclosures for pre-paid cards, including clearer fee tables. Although JP Morgan exited the pre-paid business last month due to concerns over risks following a data breach, Fitch argues that the tightening regulatory regime may also have been a factor and that other banks could follow suit. "In this scenario, Fitch believes there are benefits for nonbank players such as American Express, Green Dot and NetSpend," says the firm.

But in a list of 2013 performance highlights, the board noted that Wells Fargo's 2013 revenue dropped nearly 3% to $83.8 billion and residential mortgage originations were down 33% annually.

Blankfein in January was awarded an estimated $23 million in salary and bonus, a raise of about 9.5% from 2012 and his highest payday since the financial crisis. While the payday falls far short of the $70 million Blankfein was paid in 2007, according to a past Goldman, the amount is greater than the disclosed or estimated pay for the CEOs of Bank of America, Citigroup or JP Morgan Chase.

After a brilliant start to the year in 2013, that market faltered: Deutsche’s FICC revenue dropped by 64% from the first to the last quarter and Barclays’ by 47%. Leading American banks such as JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup and Goldman Sachs experienced a dip too. But their profits were buoyed by better equity markets, in which they have a bigger presence than Barclays and Deutsche. That difference shows up in their return on equity, a standard measure of profitability (see chart).

With market forces likely to drive significant HSA growth, financial institutions must refine their strategies and solutions to capitalize on the revenue potential of these tax-advantaged accounts.

The call center of the future will have a stronger focus on live chat and email support, which could potentially be delivered within a mobile banking application. Inbound phone calls will always be a priority, but banks are having success resolving many of these interactions with automated systems, which are becoming increasingly sophisticated. There will also likely be an increased emphasis on cross-selling and up-selling. Banks will rely on call centers for revenue generation, not just customer service.

However, financial services firms have been more cautious than other industries about adopting cloud services, with fears about data security and regulatory concerns top of mind. Still, it’s becoming increasingly clear that the cloud offers many advantages for banks, and here Bank Systems & Technology examines four ways banks are taking advantage of the cloud’s benefits.
Payments: Why They’re Already In The Cloud

As banks tentatively look to move more functions to hosted environments, perhaps one of the most natural to bring to the cloud is payments. After all, notes Celent senior analyst Gareth Lodge, banks are already doing some payments processing in the cloud, even if they don’t realize it. Lodge says several vendors already offer services run virtually that involve payments, such as hosted online banking and card processing, to which many banks already subscribe.

“We talk to banks and often hear them say, ‘We will never, ever use the cloud,’ and I tell them, ’You already are,’ ” he explains. “It’s more a lack of understanding of what the cloud actually is.”

However, Lodge acknowledges that there’s a big difference between doing some things in the cloud and performing all payments processing virtually. Part of the reason banks are hesitant to pursue cloud-based payments — and cloud services in general — is because the legacy architecture present in most institutions “makes it difficult to do,” he says. Regulatory and security concerns, and the generally risk-averse nature of financial services, also play a role.

But while it would be a bold leap, Lodge says there are many incentives for a bank to wholeheartedly embrace payments in the cloud. First, there’s a significant cost-savings aspect, he says, adding that about one-third of bank IT spend is on payments. Pointing to one channel, he adds, ”the ACH network has really not changed for decades, and banks are all looking to see how they can make changes in that cost base.” Further, Lodge says processing payments in the cloud would allow banks to conduct real-time analysis of customer payments, which would be a “game changer.”

“Real-time payments analytics can really influence and change a bank’s interaction with their customer,” he says. “But that requires single-message [processing], not batch, and high levels of availability — all things current bank systems, however good they are, weren’t designed to do in the first place.”

Preventing Disintermediation

Another reason for banks to embrace cloud payments is to stave off the threat of disintermediation. Payments is perhaps the one area where a startup tech outfit can jump in and compete with banks right away. And they can often do payments better, says Mike Laven, CEO of cloud-based payments processing company The Currency Cloud.

“In a noncloud world, payments is owned by the bank or one or two vendors,” he says. “In a cloud world, you can have many different firms and disaggregation of the value chain. Similar to what’s happened in music and other industries, specialized vendors can take individual pieces of the supply chain and optimize it, and because those services are all hosted remotely, they can do them in ways superior [to how it was handled] in the past.”

Laven says that while it’s highly unlikely banks will ever be cut entirely out of the payments picture, they can be marginalized in the process and risk losing major revenue. “Ultimately funds flow into and out of bank accounts, and you need banks for certain things, like having reserve currencies, but there are other, more consumer-facing things that big banks can’t do as good a job of and can’t be as nimble and flexible,” he says. “Banks own the rails the financial system runs on, but the trains, cars and the food served on them can be run by smaller companies.”

But Celent’s Lodge believes banks eventually will adopt cloud-based payments, and cloud systems in general, industry-wide eventually because of the great promise of cost savings, efficiency and agility. He doesn’t venture a guess, however, as to when that will happen, given the notoriously cautious nature of financial services.

“As we’re seeing even more and more cloud-based core systems solutions being offered, it’s only a matter of time,” Lodge adds. “But banks are typically the last adopters of new technology.” – Bryan Yurcan

The London-based lawyer predicts slightly less, but still estimates it will match the high cost of Libor. "I think it probably will be similar to Libor in fines. The bigger fines are when you get an antitrust breach, because then it's 10% of revenues in Europe, and in the US the fines and litigation costs can be a lot higher than in the UK and Europe," he says.

Following an increasing number of trader suspensions at major banks in late 2013 and early 2014, the forex market investigations took a further twist on March 5 when the BoE suspended a member of staff as part of its own investigations, which began in October 2013. The central bank has retained external legal counsel to investigate and report to its oversight committee on what its officials may have known or condoned. Questioned by UK members of parliament in recent weeks, both FCA chief executive Martin Wheatley and BoE governor Mark Carney acknowledged the severity of the probes.
